
--- Page 1 ---
Software Architecture
Introduction
BSc
Ingo Arnold
--- Page 2 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo Arnold 2
Lecturing 
@ University of Basel
•Software Architecture
•Software Life- Cycle Management 
@ University of Applied Sciences North- Western Switzerland
•Software Architecture (BSc)
•Managing IT in a digitized World –IT Architecture Module (MSc)
•IT Management (CAS)Work History
Enterprise and Solution Architecture Consulting GmbH –CEO (5 years)
Novartis ― Head Architecture Management (18 years)IBM ― IT Architect (3 years)
Ciba Geigy ― Head Business Solutions (5 years)Education
Computer Science (Informatik)Publications
Books
•Enterprise Architecture Function ― a pattern language for planning, building, and executing 
(2022)
•Software Architecture ― a comprehensive framework and guide for practitioners 
(2011)
•Software -Architektur ― Grundlagen Konzepte Praxis (2005, 2008) 
Papers & Forum Speeches•Ingo Arnold
Miscellaneous
Family•2 sons (both studied computer science)@ University of Cooperative Education, Lörrach
•Object -Oriented Programming
•Advanced Software -Engineering
•Software Design Patterns
Sports•Climbing, Mountainbiking, SnowboardingOther
•Curious , broadly interested , nature lover , 
appreciate good books , deep and open conversations , ... ingo.arnold@architectural -thinking.ch
+41 79 760 07 02
Ingo Arnold@LinkedIn
Module Opening

--- Page 3 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Motivation
3Your …
■Name
■Experience and background
■Software architecture conception and expectations
■…
Go to and enter the code on the screen.    https://menti.com
--- Page 4 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Few Things up- front – Logistics
4■Room and time : Room as communicated. Time: 08:15 to 11:00 / 12:15 to 15:00.
■We will usually have 15 minute breaks every 45 minutes (i.e., two per lecture).
■Your active participation and questions are prerequisites for your learning success. 
■Basic knowledge of the object -oriented paradigm , the Java programming language, 
and software design patterns are prerequisites for this course.
■I do not prescribe tools that we use. However, examples are mostly based on the 
Eclipse IDE.
■All lecture handouts (mostly PDF files) will be regularly uploaded to the lecture decks 
location.
--- Page 5 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Few Things up- front – Learning (Approach)
5■I have completely revamped the Software Architecture lecture for this semester. 
In this respect, this semester is a premium!
The initial lecture is an exception because I will guide you through myset of slides .
For all subsequent lectures , youwill work through a set of slides containing relevant software 
architecture knowledge at home so that you come prepared to the next lecture . 
During clas s, we will jointly apply what you have learned at home .
The theoretical knowledge slide sets form the core of my teaching materials. 
What I have not done (not managed to do ) to date is to create videos in which I explain the slide set 
material in more detail. 
However, I have structured the slide sets so that they can also serve as a script in addition to 
providing clear illustrations. In this respect, the slide sets are sufficiently self-explanatory .
--- Page 6 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo Arnold
Module Opening
Few Things up- front – Learning (Approach) 
6■I have completely revamped the Software Architecture lecture for this semester. 
In this respect, this semester is a premium! (continued)
In addition to the slide sets , you will receive further instructions for working through individual slide 
set chapters in the form of accompanying documents (‘_Instruction’). 
The accompanying document 
(‘_Instruction’) also contains questions to 
answer and literature references that refer 
you to further sources of information. 
Crucial resources I’ll be referring heavily 
are the two books to the right . 
--- Page 7 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Few Things up- front – Learning (Approach)
7■I have completely revamped the Software Architecture lecture for this semester. 
In this respect, this semester is a premium! (continued)
You are of course also welcome to use ChatGPT or similar tools at home to help you learn the 
theoretical material covered in the slide set in a more personalised way.
Further, you will receive literature lists at the end of each slide deck.
Ifyou still have questions after working through an appropriate slide set, please make a note of them 
and bring them with you to the next lecture . 
I will answer any open questions at the beginning of each lecture and before moving on to the 
application of what you have just learned . 
--- Page 8 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Few Things up- front – Learning (Approach)
8■I have completely revamped the Software Architecture lecture for this semester. 
In this respect, this semester is a premium! (continued)
The learning concept behind the revised lecture is described below.
Discover new aspects, 
gain insights, understand 
things and store them in 
your short -term memory .
Lecture slide decks, Instruction documents. 
Individual , at your paceFrom short -term to long-
term memory , 
remembering learning 
experiences.
Instruction documents including learning tasks and questions. 
Individual , small , at your 
pacePutting what you have 
learned into practice, 
applying it to new tasks.
Practical exercises, case 
studies, training tasks. 
Cooperation, at group 
pace
--- Page 9 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Few Things up- front – Learning (Approach)
9■I have completely revamped the Software Architecture lecture for this semester. 
In this respect, this semester is a premium! (continued)
The learning concept behind the revised lecture is described below.

--- Page 10 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Few Things up- front – Learning (Approach)
10■I have completely revamped the Software Architecture lecture for this semester. 
In this respect, this semester is a premium! (continued)
Preparation phase misconceptions
Preparation ≠ Scrolling through PPT decks.
Tasks and questions in the Instruction documents are essential elements.
Ask questions –even during the preparation phase.
The aim of preparation is not a perfect understanding, but rather being able to participate in the classroom phase. 
If you are unable to participate in a unit (e.g. due to illness), join in with the current topic and catch up on what you 
have missed later.
--- Page 11 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Few Things up- front – Learning (Time M anagement )
11■I have completely revamped the Software Architecture lecture for this semester. 
In this respect, this semester is a premium! (continued)
Pay attention to what you do and how long you do something! 
If you get stuck, break out of your inner loop and start asking questions
Use discussion forums in Teams, chat, email, etc.
Form groups and support each other
Collect questions for the classroom phase
Don't be a perfectionist when it comes to learning tasks
It's (often) not about finding the (perfect) solution
It's (also) about thinking things through to understand a given problem and see a solution shine through it
It's about learning from experience, including what doesn't work (‘those who fail productively learn more’)
--- Page 12 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Few Things up- front – Learning (Failure)
12■I have completely revamped the Software Architecture lecture for this semester. 
In this respect, this semester is a premium! (continued)
“The greatest teacher, failure is.” (Yoda)
“Negative results are just what I want. They’re just as valuable to me as positive results. I can never find 
the thing that does the job best until I find the ones that don’t.” (Thomas Edison)
“Wirwerden Fehler feiern !” (Christian Spannagel)
--- Page 13 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Few Things up- front – Learning (MS Teams)
13■One Channel per module
Use them to conduct discussions and ask questions.
Help others by answering questions.
■Chat/call for study groups in the preparation phase
■Channel “General” –under “Files”
Slide decks
Instruction documents
Exercises

--- Page 14 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Few Things up-front – Exam 
■Exam
At the end of the semester, you will write 
an exam . 
At the same time, you will write a preliminary exam in the middle of the 
semester, 50% of which will be included in the final semester grade. 
14
--- Page 15 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Learning Objectives
You ...
■know the architecture elaboration process for systematically developing a 
solution to a given problem
■can analyze requirements with respect to their architectural significance and 
ensure traceability between requirement and design
■know important architectural views on the design of software systems
■are able to represent the design of systems in architectural views and recognize 
architectural decisions coded in them 
■can justify own design decisions and develop own system architectures
■can evaluate system architectures as a whole and in parts with respect to their 
advantages and disadvantages
15
--- Page 16 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Cornerstone Systems and Information
My contact details
Phone: +41 79 760 0702
eMail: ingo.arnold@fhnw.ch (ingo.e.arnold@outlook.com )
Webex https://fhnw.webex.com/meet/ingo.arnold
Lecture decks location
FHNW -share
IT Support
it-support@fhnw.ch / +41 61 228 50 50
16
--- Page 17 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Structure and Order
17
The high-level structure of the lecture is based on the book Software Architecture: 
A Comprehensive Framework and Guide for Practitioners [Vogel, Arnold et al 2011] . 

--- Page 18 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo Arnold
Module Opening
Structure and Order
18
The strict differentiation of dimensions and their isolated consideration is only 
useful for rough orientation purposes. Software architecture is a holistic discipline 
and this entirety is lost when it is considered too particularized. 
--- Page 19 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldModule Opening
Structure and Order
19
Nevertheless, we will use the dimensions as an overarching orientation framework 
and place short introductions to each dimension at its beginning. 

--- Page 20 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldQuestions
20

--- Page 21 ---
@ Ingo Arnold
©Ingo ArnoldBibliography
Lecture
[Arnold 2022]
Arnold, Ingo, Enterprise Architecture Function ― a pattern language for planning, designing, and executing , 
Springer Science and Business Media, Berlin Heidelberg, 2022
[Vogel, Arnold et al 2011]
Vogel, Oliver; Arnold, Ingo; Chugtai, Arif; Kehrer, Timo, Software Architecture: A Comprehensive Framework 
and Guide for Practitioners , Springer Science and Business Media, Berlin Heidelberg, 2011
21